feat!: add id-based outer reference resolution for DAG plans (#1031)
substrait-io/substrait: site/docs/expressions/field_references.md

Reviewer: What do you think about explicitly banning the usage of `steps_out` to reference relations outside of your scope? In that case, you _must_ use an `id_reference`?

Author: I wish but that will make this change effectively a breaking change. We can discuss about this in the meeting.

    * Should we support column reordering/positioning using a masked complex expression? (Right now, you can only mask things out.)

### Outer References

Outer references allow expressions inside a subquery to access records from an enclosing relation. The `OuterReference` root type supports two resolution strategies that can be used independently or together:

#### `steps_out` (offset-based)

> `steps_out` resolves the reference by counting subquery boundaries upward (`steps_out >= 1`). This works correctly whenever the plan is a **tree** — each relation has exactly one parent, so the path to the binding relation is unique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`steps_out` resolves the reference by counting subquery boundaries upward (`steps_out >= 1`). This works correctly whenever the plan is a **tree**, i.e when each relation has exactly one parent, the path to the binding relation can be uniquely determined via `steps_out`. 
```

#### `id_reference` (id-based)

> When a plan contains **common subexpressions** via `ReferenceRel`, the same relation can be reached through multiple paths with different depths. In that case, offset-based resolution is ambiguous because `steps_out` depends on *which* path is followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a plan contains **common subrelation** via `ReferenceRel`, the same relation can be reached through multiple paths with different depths. In that case, offset-based resolution is ambiguous because `steps_out` depends on *which* path is followed.
```
might make more sense?

> When a plan contains **common subexpressions** via `ReferenceRel`, the same relation can be reached through multiple paths with different depths. In that case, offset-based resolution is ambiguous because `steps_out` depends on *which* path is followed.

Reviewer: I think that this section may read a bit better if instead it was 
```markdown
#### `steps_out` (offset-based)
<explanation of WHAT steps_out is with an example>
#### `id_reference` (id-based)
<explanation of WHAT id_reference is with an example>

#### When `id_reference` is required
example of case where it is required. 
```

I think it would read clearer to people without the context of the problem this is solving to just see the concept in isolation. Then in the subsequent section, they see _why_ you need to use one vs the other. WDYT?

Author: Revised accordingly. PTAL

`id_reference` resolves this by naming the binding relation directly via its plan-wide unique `RelCommon.id`. The `id` on the referenced relation must be set (> 0) and unique across all relations in the plan.

At least one of `steps_out` or `id_reference` must be set. When both are present, `id_reference` is authoritative and `steps_out` is advisory (useful for backward compatibility with consumers that only understand `steps_out`).

> For example, consider a plan with two nested scalar subqueries that share a common subexpression `x`. The outer reference to `tableA.a` lives inside `x`, which is reached via paths of different depth:

Reviewer: again maybe subrelation is a better term here?

Author: reworded as shared relation.

> For example, consider a plan with two nested scalar subqueries that share a common subexpression `x`. The outer reference to `tableA.a` lives inside `x`, which is reached via paths of different depth:

Reviewer: [Could we add some textformat examples](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/tree/main/site/examples/proto-textformat)?

```
ProjectRel
├── ReadRel(tableA)  [id=1]
└── Subquery.Scalar ── (1)
    └── SetRel(MINUS_PRIMARY)
        ├── Subquery.Scalar ── (2)
        │   └── x: FilterRel(a > outer_ref(tableA.a))  [id=2]
        │         └── ReadRel(tableB)
        └── x  (shared via ReferenceRel)
```

> The common subexpression `x` contains an outer reference to `tableA.a`. It is reached through two paths — one via subquery (2), one directly — so `steps_out` would need a different value depending on which path is followed. With `id_reference = 1`, the reference inside `x` unambiguously names `ReadRel(tableA)` regardless of path.

Reviewer: again would subrelation make sense here?

`id_reference` resolves the reference by referring to the binding relation via its plan-wide unique `RelCommon.id`. The `id` on the referenced relation must be set (>= 1) and unique across all relations in the plan.

#### When to use `id_reference`

`id_reference` must be used instead of `steps_out` when a plan contains **shared relations** via `ReferenceRel` with unresolved outer references. In such plans, the binding relation (i.e., the relation providing the actual value of the outer reference) can be reached through multiple paths with different depths, making offset-based resolution ambiguous because `steps_out` depends on *which* path is followed.

For example, consider a plan with two nested scalar subqueries that share a common relation `x`. The outer reference to `tableA.a` lives inside `x`, which is reached via paths of different depth:

```
PlanRel.relations[0].rel:  # let's call it 'x'
FilterRel(a > outer_ref(tableA.a))
  └── ReadRel(tableB)

PlanRel.relations[1].root:
ProjectRel [id=1]
├── ReadRel(tableA)
└── Subquery.Scalar ── (1)
    └── SetRel(MINUS_PRIMARY)
        ├── Subquery.Scalar ── (2)
        │   └── ReferenceRel(0)
        └── ReferenceRel(0)
```

> The shared relation `x` contains an outer reference to `tableA.a`. It is reached through two paths — one via subquery (2), one directly — so `steps_out` would need a different value depending on which path is followed. With `id_reference = 1`, the reference inside `x` unambiguously names `ProjectRel` to resolve the outer reference regardless of path.

Reviewer: It would be nice to show the example of the "good" case right after, i.e. the first relation but using an id reference.

Author: Hmm... Do you mean making the example more explicit using steps out and id? I'll make the change.

Author: Revised. PTAL

#### `steps_out` (offset-based)

`steps_out` resolves the reference by counting subquery boundaries upward (`steps_out >= 1`). This works correctly whenever the plan is a **tree**, i.e., when each relation has exactly one parent, the path to the binding relation can be uniquely determined via `steps_out`.

#### `id_reference` (id-based)

`id_reference` resolves the reference by referring to the binding relation via its plan-wide unique `RelCommon.id`. The `id` on the referenced relation must be set (>= 1) and unique across all relations in the plan.

#### Coexistence rules

Exactly one of `steps_out` or `id_reference` must be set on each `OuterReference`. A single plan may contain outer references using different strategies (e.g., some using `steps_out` and others using `id_reference`), as long as every individual reference is unambiguous. However, if any shared relation (via `ReferenceRel`) contains an unresolved outer reference, that reference **must** use `id_reference`.

#### When to use `id_reference`

> `id_reference` must be used instead of `steps_out` when a plan contains **shared relations** via `ReferenceRel` with unresolved outer references in the shared relations. In such plans, the binding relation (i.e., the relation providing the actual value of the outer reference) can be reached through multiple paths with different depths, making offset-based resolution ambiguous because `steps_out` depends on *which* path is followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`id_reference` must be used instead of `steps_out` when an outer reference appears inside a relation shared via `ReferenceRel` and the shared relation can be reached through multiple paths with different subquery depths, making `steps_out` ambiguous. In this case, the same outer reference could require different `steps_out` values depending on which path is followed.
```

This is just one suggestion. The thing I am hoping to fix here is that the first sentence reads a bit ambiguously to me: 
> `id_reference` must be used instead of `steps_out` when a plan contains **shared relations** via `ReferenceRel` with unresolved outer references in the shared relations.
This sounds like we may require `id_reference` _always_, rather than merely where it is ambiguous.

For example, consider a plan with two nested scalar subqueries that share a common relation `x`. The outer reference to `tableA.a` lives inside `x`, which is reached via paths of different depth:

```
PlanRel.relations[0].rel:  # let's call it 'x'
FilterRel(a > outer_ref(steps_out=1, tableA.a)) # steps_out 1 or 2?
  └── ReadRel(tableB)

PlanRel.relations[1].root:
ProjectRel # Correct binding for tableA.a for the outer reference tableA.a in x.
├── ReadRel(tableA)
└── Subquery.Scalar # Subquery (1)
    └── SetRel(MINUS_PRIMARY)
        ├── ProjectRel
        |   └── Subquery.Scalar # Subquery (2)
        │       └── ReferenceRel(0) # Reference 1: correct steps_out = 2

>         └── ReferenceRel(0) # Reference 2: correct steps_out = 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        │       └── ReferenceRel(0) # Here steps_out=1 binds incorrectly, because tableA.a is actually two subquery boundaries out.
        └── ReferenceRel(0) # Here steps_out=1 binds correctly, because tableA.a is one subquery boundary out.
```

```

> From the reference 1, the correct `steps_out` is 2 because it needs to go through 2 subqueries to reach the ProjectRel. From the reference 2, the correct `steps_out` is 1 because it only needs to go over 1 subquery. Thus, the outer reference is malformed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same shared relation `x` contains a single stored `steps_out=1` outer reference, but that value is only correct for one of its uses. The other use would need `steps_out=2`, so offset-based resolution is ambiguous.
```
